in the aftermath of a losing battle
regardless of how aggressively a bobster
has behaved it becomes unwilling to
fight further even against another
previously defeated opponent
philosophers are first and foremost
normal human beings just like you and I
the ideas they write down in books are
sometimes their response to political
conditions unfolding in their own era
there's sometimes a response to personal
problems in their private lives and
sometimes historically we know what
those problems were and sometimes they
weren't recorded for history and often
all too often philosophers are people
who get excited about new ideas emerging
from the sciences they take little
fragments of information from the
sciences and they get inspired and just
kind of run with it kind of make up a
bunch of new stuff one of the most
extreme examples of this is Descartes so
if you're not a fan of Rene Descartes
you might at least recognize the
adjective form of his name Cartesian you
have to be very famous in philosophy to
have your name used as an adjective in
case um Descartes you know he saw some
black-and-white diagrams of the
structure of the brain and he just got
massively inspired by what he saw as
literally the central organ of the brain
the pineal gland which is also
pronounced the pineal gland whatever you
know he just had no idea what this thing
did its biological function its
structural significance its role in
cognition or anything else he had
absolutely no idea but I mean the guy
saw some diagrams he got some ideas he
ended up creating but we could frankly
call like a new religion a totally
fictitious bunch of biological and
psychological claims with the brain you
heard about some new discoveries in the
sciences
and he just took those ideas and ran
with them I mean you know in that sense
philosophy sometimes more resembles the
creative arts or even resembles science
fiction I think people have really
overlooked the extent to which the
philosophy of mind presented by dr.
Jordan Peterson likewise is his response
to some little fragments of scientific
knowledge that he read about lobsters
about crayfish he read them he didn't
really understand them and then he he
got inspired and made a whole bunch of
things up and he made those things up he
came up with those ideas I think
transparently in response to personal
problems he was struggling with and
partly yes in response to political and
social preoccupations that we see
throughout his writing a vanquished
competitor loses confidence sometimes
for days sometimes the defeat can have
even more severe consequences if a
dominant lobster is badly defeated its
brain basically dissolves then it grows
a new subordinates brain one more
appropriate to its new lowly position
its original brain just isn't
sophisticated enough to manage the
transformation from King to bottom dog
without virtually complete dissolution
and regrowth anyone who has experienced
painful transformation after a serious
defeat in romance or career may feel
some sense of kinship with the one
successful crustacean one citation for a
whole lot of statements of fact well
let's look at reference eight side note
I am getting incredibly lucky on finding
the PDFs for these things online the
quick version is I don't know where
Peterson got some of the ideas he talks
about because it sure as [ __ ] isn't in
this paper after reading its brain
basically dissolves I came into this
paper expecting some like magical
butterfly transformation here like
crustaceans aren't really far removed
from like other creepy crawlies
so maybe it's able to somehow just
dissolve its brain this paper says
nothing about brains dissolving this
paper says nothing about brains
dissolving this section begins with a
discussion of reference 9 you only know
this if you actually have reference 9 in
front of you because Peterson's
reference placement is practically
random anyways basically lobster Dom's
have more serotonin pumping through them
from reference 8 you win you get a
higher level of serotonin if you're a
submissive lobster you have a higher
ratio of October mean to serotonin but
if you give lobster subs more serotonin
they start acting da me then if you give
lobsters Prozac the effects of the
serotonin shot are reduced so in this
experiment giving the lobsters Prozac
kept the serotonin out in the goo
basically and not in the tissues and why
the [ __ ] is Pierson talking about this
he says that prozac has much the same
chemical and behavioral effect in
depressed people as Prozac a
performance-enhancing drug I hadn't
realized is that on their warnings for
the drug commercial so we've already
established that dr. Jordan Peterson is
fundamentally the same as Rene Descartes
in that he's a non specialist who
stumbled upon some scientific anecdotes
in another field he got inspired and as
we say in English he ran with it he
started making up new ideas in response
to this inspiration it remains for us to
question why why was he so inspired by
this why did it matter so much to now in
the case of rena d card there's an
explanation you can look at what were
his religious and psychological
assumptions what was that he was looking
for consciously or unconsciously that
made him respond so
dramatically to this diagram of the
brain and thinking yes yes that's it you
can put the pieces together okay he had
an idea about the soul being a material
and there must be a gateway between the
body and the soul somewhere in the brain
he had an agenda and he took some bits
and pieces of science to suit his agenda
that's exactly what happened with dr.
Jordan Peterson when he stumbled upon
this anecdote about lobsters and
crayfish okay he had no sincere interest
in the details of these scientific
studies the points already been made I
quoted another YouTube channel there
Cass Eris the point has already been
made that if you were to take his
scientific claims seriously they would
be irresponsible and false I would go
further I wouldn't you say it's invalid
I'd say it's somewhat surreal and
dreamlike I think Jordan Peterson
responded to these scientific sources in
the same way some people respond to
poetry or a quotation from the Buddha or
something he just treated this like a
literary trope he got all worked up
about it and then he ran with it and he
ran and ran and ran this is a huge deal
yeah what why what does it mean to him
well the idea that unequal levels of
serotonin in the brain correspond to
your dominance in society the idea that
serotonin has like a dollar value in the
economy of social inequality that's a
very very powerful symbol friend it
links his political philosophy to his
psychological philosophy okay and it
also links his public message of improve
your posture stand up with your back
straight be a dominant personal time it
links that to his own family's private
tragic struggle in a very emotionally
powerful way until quite recently until
just a few months ago
Jordan Peterson lived with the delusion
that his daughter had a form of
hereditary depression that she had
inherited depression from him no
scientific basis for that belief he
imagined he convinced himself and he
felt guilty about the notion that he had
a mysterious autoimmune disease that
made him depressed an autoimmune disease
with depression as a symptom and that
his daughter had also inherited this
disease now the symptoms were real
the symptoms were real and it didn't
take a genius to write in and say hey
you know what your symptoms sound a lot
like Lyme disease this person this is
one of the fans of Micheli of Peterson
Burton said hey you know Jordan Peterson
symptoms sound a lot like Lyme disease
and yours do too so yeah it was it was
always possible for people to guess that
you know um early onset arthritis having
arthritis when you're still a child that
sounds like Lyme disease
what miquellee appears had actually had
was Lyme disease and then she had a
whole long list of side effects from the
irrelevant drugs that she was taking
because her Lyme disease went
undiagnosed or you might say was
misdiagnosed okay so that's a real
tragedy
I'm not ridiculing him for that I'm not
really killing his daughter for that
it's a tremendous tragedy that they had
this disease in the family it was not
correctly diagnosed it went untreated
and then they interpreted the symptoms
of that illness as if it were a
hereditary mysterious undiagnosed
illness that dr. Jordan Peterson was
responsible for himself okay so you have
Peterson developing dependence chemical
dependence on antidepressants SSRI
antidepressant and coming up with a
justification for that you have dr.
Peterson's daughter developing
dependence on SSRI antidepressants and
coming up with a justification
okay you have a whole family making
excuses and trying to philosophize about
their tragic private struggle to get
along in society to compete to be part
of that dominance hierarchy when they
have quote/unquote a serotonin deficit
know what Peterson did here is based on
a very cursory reading even of the
research into the significance of
serotonin for lobsters what he's saying
is really false even about lobsters it's
also false as it is applied to human
beings it'd be a long video forgotten
the details okay
Peterson never took a sincere interest
in what the chemical effects of SSRI
drugs are he seems to know much less
about it than I do I'm not a specialist
in the field so that's really saying
something okay what Peterson was
interested in was a justification for
his own sense of inferiority as someone
who he considered himself to have been
born with with low serotonin with the
serotonin deficit so you can see he
claims here that he claims is that
prozac has the same effect on humans as
it has on on these lobsters in this
particular study and both are false
that's not the effect prozac has on
humans as even cast makes fun of them
should make some jokes that this doesn't
make sense this novel prozac does the
people it also actually doesn't make
sense with what the studies are saying
about lobsters three different species
of crustacean are dealt with it's a
little bit complicated with those
studies there's no sincere interest in
the science on either side of the
equation what there is is a profound
commitment to self justification in
dealing with his own sense of inadequacy
as a relentless social climber and as
someone who has this conservative
competitive view of society as a bunch
of dominus arrogance and also for him
dealing with his sense of guilt when he
looks at his daughter chronically sick
on a long list of medications barely
able to get at a bed
all these horrible side effects right
and he feels looking at that that it's
all his fault so we have a misdiagnosed
int illness Jordan imagines his family
has hereditary depression
Jordan invents a philosophy that
justifies his family's reliance on SSRI
drugs
thus the lobsters thus the theory of
serotonin levels as the currency in the
economy of dominance and then plot twist
his daughter is diagnosed with Lyme
disease that's what explains the
symptoms she had it
[Music]